QoS profile files proposal (#296)
ros2/design: articles/external_qos_file.md

published: true
---

- This will become a table of contents (this text will be scraped).
{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Overview

ROS 2 added the concept of [Quality of Service (QoS)](qos.md) settings to publishers, subscriptions, clients and services.
As of ROS 2 Foxy Fitzroy, QoS settings can only be specified in code.
To avoid recompiling the source code with patched QoS, node implementers have used different mechanisms to configure QoS profiles:
- Command line arguments
- ROS parameters
- Combining system default QoS with vendor specific QoS profiles.

Instead of having different ways of externally specifying QoS for the different entities, it would be good to have a standardized way to select QoS settings.

## QoS file format

DDS uses the concept of QoS profiles ([rti documentation](https://community.rti.com/examples/using-qos-profiles)), in which each profile has a name. When creating an entity (e.g. a `DataWriter`), the passed profile name will be looked up in the qos profiles file being used, and the QoS can be loaded in that way.

> ROS 2 can use a simpler approach, leveraging node name uniqueness <sup id="back_node_name_uniqueness">[1](#to_node_name_uniqueness)</sup>.

Reviewer: > ROS 2 can use a simpler approach, leveraging node name uniqueness

I think this part needs much more consideration. Using the node name, topic name and potential profile id (see below) to identify the entity an external configuration applies to is fundamentally different from how it is being done in DDS (where an entity has an identifier associated with it and the configuration for that identifies is defined). I would almost call it "inversion of control":
* In DDS the naming is define in the code and the configuration file defines settings for those name. Multiple entities (e.g. the ones talking to each other) can use the same name and therefore reuse the same configuration. That kind of configuration seems to be tailored to developing and configuring a specific appplication.
* With this proposal ROS would do the "opposite" - trying to identify the entities from outside the code (which brings in the overhead of considering remapping as well as the ambiguity addressed by "profile ids"). It also means that for related entities each must be configured individually while needing to make sure that the configurations are compatible.

Maybe the proposed approach is motivated by the fact that ROS aim mostly to write reusable nodes and has more of a framework character. Anyway I think this overall direction choice would benefit from a much more detailed rational *why* it is chosen.

Author: > In DDS the naming is define in the code and the configuration file defines settings for those name. Multiple entities (e.g. the ones talking to each other) can use the same name and therefore reuse the same configuration. That kind of configuration seems to be tailored to developing and configuring a specific application.

IMO, going the DDS way is problematic.
What if you're loading nodes written by different people and the qos profile names collide?
Should we have qos profile name remapping?

> Maybe the proposed approach is motivated by the fact that ROS aim mostly to write reusable nodes and has more of a framework character.

That's the main difference IMO.
Without the "inversion of control", we will need qos profiles name with the full power of remapping and namespacing, and I don't think that adds much value.
When that's added, you're already having to identify the qos profile name from outside the code, and that's the same problem that using the node name/topic name/entity type to do the identification.

@dirk-thomas does that make sense to you?

---

The only disadvantage I see of the proposed alternative, is that you don't have a way to say "I want these two entities to use the same QoS profile" in code. I don't see it as a big downside though.

Reviewer: > does that make sense to you?

I am fine with that kind of rational. We should add this to the proposal though.

> The only disadvantage I see of the proposed alternative, is that you don't have a way to say "I want these two entities to use the same QoS profile" in code. I don't see it as a big downside though.

I think the chance that both endpoints don't agree / match is pretty significant.

Reviewer 2: > The only disadvantage I see of the proposed alternative, is that you don't have a way to say "I want these two entities to use the same QoS profile" in code. I don't see it as a big downside though.

Not being able to say that in code is, to me, not a problem because nodes should be implemented independently of each other. We do need a way to say that easily from outside the code, though. I think that the second chunk of code in [this comment](https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296#discussion_r464528009) satisfies this requirement.

Author: > I think the chance that both endpoints don't agree / match is pretty significant.

As @gbiggs commented, that only could work for a publisher and subscription created in the same node that should match, but there's no way in code to ensure QoS matching for independently developed nodes.

Author: > I am fine with that kind of rational. We should add this to the proposal though.

I extended the rationale in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7.

---
layout: default
title: Configuring QoS from an external file
permalink: articles/qos_file.html
abstract:
  This article describes how to configure QoS from an external file.
author: '[Ivan Santiago Paunovic](https://github.com/ivanpauno)'
published: true
---

- This will become a table of contents (this text will be scraped).
{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

Original Author: {{ page.author }}

## Overview

> `ROS 2` added the [Quality of Service (QoS)](qos.md) to publishers, subscriptions, clients and services.

Reviewer 3: Wording suggestion:

```suggestion
ROS 2 exposes several DDS [Quality of Service (QoS)](qos.md) settings for entities such as publishers, subscriptions, clients, and services.
```

Reviewer 3: I could be persuaded otherwise, but I suggest we use the word "entities" instead of "endpoints" throughout this document, similar to the existing [QoS doc](https://github.com/ros2/design/blob/gh-pages/articles/qos.md).

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to not call them "_DDS_ QoS settings". Other non-DDS RMWs might have QoS as well, and even if the underlying middleware doesn't there is an expectation that the RMW implementation will provide them instead,

Author: Done in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

> Up `ROS 2 Foxy`, the `QoS` can only be specified in code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of ROS 2 Foxy Fitzroy, QoS settings can only be specified in code.
```

Author: Done https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

> To avoid recompiling the source code with patched `QoS`, node implementers have used different mechanisms to configure `QoS` profiles:

Reviewer 3: nitpick: I don't we need highlight terms like "ROS 2" and "QoS". This comment applies throughout the document.

```suggestion
To avoid recompiling the source code with patched QoS, node implementers have used different mechanisms to configure QoS profiles:
```

Author: Done https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

- Command line arguments
- ROS parameters
- Combining system default QoS with vendor specific `QoS` profiles.

> Instead of having different ways of externally specifying `QoS` for the different endpoints, it would be good to have a standardized way to specific `QoS` profiles.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead of having different ways of externally specifying QoS for the different endpoints, it would be good to have a standardized way to select QoS settings.
```

Author: See https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

## QoS file format

> DDS uses the concept of QoS profiles ([rti documentation](https://community.rti.com/examples/using-qos-profiles)), in which each profile has a name. When creating an entity (e.g. a `DataWriter`), the passed profile name will be looked up in the qos profiles file being used, and the QoS can be loaded in that way.

Reviewer 2: One sentence per line.

```suggestion
DDS uses the concept of QoS profiles ([rti documentation](https://community.rti.com/examples/using-qos-profiles)), in which each profile has a name.
When creating an entity (e.g. a `DataWriter`), the passed profile name will be looked up in the QoS profiles file being used, and the QoS can be loaded in that way rather than from hard-coded values in the source code.
```

> DDS uses the concept of QoS profiles ([rti documentation](https://community.rti.com/examples/using-qos-profiles)), in which each profile has a name. When creating an entity (e.g. a `DataWriter`), the passed profile name will be looked up in the qos profiles file being used, and the QoS can be loaded in that way.

Reviewer 2: Consider _also_ linking to the [DDS Consolidated XML Syntax specification](https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS-XML/1.0/PDF) section 7.3.2, which is where the QoS profile syntx is actually defined (although it was originally proposed by RTI).

Author: done in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/596ee20a80095f66f8ca5cdc5fa9c57dffd8749b.

ROS 2 can use a simpler approach, leveraging node name uniqueness <sup id="back_node_name_uniqueness">[1](#to_node_name_uniqueness)</sup>.

> <b id="to_node_name_uniqueness">1</b> Node name uniqueness is not being enforced up to Foxy, though it is supposed. [↩](#back_node_name_uniqueness)

Reviewer 2: "is supposed"

Do you mean "assumed"?

Author: yeap, thanks for the correction.

Author: done in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/596ee20a80095f66f8ca5cdc5fa9c57dffd8749b.

### Nodes

In an acceptable `QoS` file format, it should be to distinguish `QoS` settings targeted to different nodes.
Thus, a top level tag to identify the node should be available.

> Example alternatives:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
QoS settings apply to entities that are associated with ROS nodes.
Thus, a top level tag to identify the node should be available in the file format.
Here are a couple examples:
```

Reviewer 2: "couple _of_ examples"

(Turns out, you can't make a suggestion to a suggestion!)

Author: Solved in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

```xml
<qos_profiles>

>     <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">

Reviewer 2: How will the namespacing work with remapping? Is the assumption that this must match a launched node?

Do we want to allow QoS profiles to be "remapped" to a node at different locations?

Author: > How will the namespacing work with remapping? Is the assumption that this must match a launched node?

Yes, the name and namespace should match the already remapped and expanded name of the node.

Parameter files work in the same way.

> Do we want to allow QoS profiles to be "remapped" to a node at different locations?

I think that it would be good in the file format to have a way to define a "profile", and then apply it to several entities.
I have to add that to the proposal.

Author: I have added the concept of "profile" in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7.

        ...
    </node>
<qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        ...
```

### Endpoint type

> It should be possible to distinguish between the different endpoint types in a qos profile file.

Reviewer 3: nit: capitalize the acronym "QoS". This comment applies throughout the document.

```suggestion
It should be possible to distinguish between the different endpoint types in a QoS profile file.
```

Author: done https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

For example:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">  <!--Relative name-->
            ...
        </publisher>
        <subscription topic_name="/another_ns/asd">  <!--Absolute name-->
            ...
        </subscription>
    </node>
<qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: /another_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
```

> Besides `publisher` and `subscription` tags, `client` and `service` should be allowed.

Reviewer 2: Has there been any progress on figuring out QoS for actions?

Reviewer 3: AFAIK, users are able to configure the QoS of the separate topics and services that make up an action, but I don't think there's been any discussion about applying a QoS profile to an action as a whole.

So, in theory, we should be able to specify QoS overrides for the topics and services for an action but I'm not sure what it would look like (or how meaningful it would be).

Author: Yeah, currently action QoS can be configured for each topic and service that make up the action (see [here](https://github.com/ros2/rcl/blob/af438bcca1ffb69714c0b225ba0f80aceab04906/rcl_action/include/rcl_action/action_client.h#L44-L52)).
I haven't thought if that was a good idea or not, maybe we should have only one action QoS, instead of five.

I think the proposed file format should include actions, so I will think on how they can be included.

---

Unrelated note: We currently have only on `rmw_qos_profile_t` type, which I don't think is a good idea.
For example, the `deadline` QoS is ignored in subscriptions.

Maybe we should clean that up before implementing this proposal, though it doesn't matter much now.

Reviewer 3: > Maybe we should clean that up before implementing this proposal, though it doesn't matter much now.

Sounds like scope creep; opening an issue for that clean up would be alright, but I guess it can happen independent of this feature.

Author: > Sounds like scope creep

I have an unfortunate tendency to creep the scope of what I'm doing a lot :joy:.

Author: I have added a note about actions in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/274584b12c04eaaab72c2377fa4a1baf77b47338.

> Besides `publisher` and `subscription` tags, `client` and `service` should be allowed.

Reviewer 2: DDS QoS profiles are not specified as reader or writer. If we need to distinguish between publisher and subscriber (rather than just saying "topic QoS" or even generic QoS) then the reason should be given.

Author: > DDS QoS profiles are not specified as reader or writer. If we need to distinguish between publisher and subscriber (rather than just saying "topic QoS" or even generic QoS) then the reason should be given.

I think they are.
e.g.: deadline QoS policy isn't part of the reader QoS, and it's part of writer QoS.

You also have topic QoS, that become the default for readers and publishers on that topic (and can be modified for a particular publisher/subscription).

---

The idea here wasn't to differentiate the subscription and publisher QoS profiles (which I think should be distinguished).
It was rather to have a mechanism to set different QoS settings in a publisher and subscription on the same topic within a node.
e.g.: A publisher with history depth 1 and a subscription with history depth 100 in the same topic is not a strange combination.

There might be the case that you want to repeat the same profile for both.
For that, I think that the proposal should have a way to define a profile in the file, that can later be reused.
The proposal is lacking that feature, but I'm planning to add it.
Does that make sense?

Reviewer 2: Yes, that makes sense.

> ### QoS profiles ids (optional)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### QoS profiles IDs (optional)
```

Author: See https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

In the case that a node wants to create two `publishers` on the same topic with different QoS, the above format wouldn't allow to identify uniquely the `publisher`. The same applies to other kinds of endpoints.

> To solve that issue, the format could allow an using a profile id, instead of the topic name:

Reviewer 3: I assume you mean "in addition to" the topic name, not "instead of"?
```suggestion
To solve this issue, the format could support a profile ID, in addition to the topic name:
```

Author: see https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="1">
            ...
        </publisher>

>         <subscription topic_name="asd" profile_id="2">

Reviewer 3: I think we want this example (and the next example) to have two entities with the same type, right? We shouldn't need IDs to distinguish a publisher from a subscription on the same topic.

Author: Thanks! Solved in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

            ...
        </subscription>
    </node>
<qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: 1
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: 2
            qos:
                ...
```

> `rcl` API would need to be extended to support profiles id.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`rcl` API would need to be extended to support profiles IDs.
```

Author: fixed in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e

Reviewer 3: This can still be addressed.

Author: Ups, I sometimes lost track of what comments I've already addressed.
It should be fixed now.

> This mechanism should be avoided, except in the few use cases where there are collisions.

Reviewer 3: It's probably worth clarifying; avoided by the end-user vs avoided by the API?

Author: clarified in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e

### Default profiles for endpoints in different nodes

It is common to have several nodes creating the same endpoint, and the same qos profile is desired in all of them.

> A default tag can be added to solve this:

Reviewer 2: It's not clear when this default is applied, probably because it's not (yet) clear when the profiles in this file are available. Are they loaded by a node, or the launch system, or is the entire system restricted to one file?

Author: > probably because it's not (yet) clear when the profiles in this file are available

My first idea was to fully specify the QoS profile iniline after the entity tag:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            <qos base_profile="default">  <!--Defaults to rmw_qos_profile_t default-->
              <reliability>reliable</reliability>
              <history_depth>100</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

But I think that having a way to define a profile in the file and reusing it is a better idea (defining the profile inline should still be valid).

> It's not clear when this default is applied

If there's no rule specific for the node looking up the file, it will use the one in `default`.
I also wanted to have a way of only overriding some of the QoS settings, and use as a base the profile in default e.g.:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            <qos base_profile="default">
              <reliability>best_effort</reliability>
              <history_depth>100</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </default>

    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            <qos>
              <!--This is already best effort, as the profile in <default> says so-->
              <history_depth>10</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```
though that might be confusing.

---

> Are they loaded by a node, or the launch system, or is the entire system restricted to one file?

The launch system doesn't load anything.
The proposal includes `rcl` API for loading the file.
There would be one global loaded file in init_options, and each node can optionally load a different file.

See `Usage in init options and node options` section.
(it's the same idea that having both "global arguments" and "local arguments").

The structure that represents the "loaded file" could also be filled up by other means, so the side loading system won't be restricted to a file format.

Author: I think this is clearer now after https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7.

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>
        <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">
            ...
        </publisher>
    </default>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            ...  <!--QoS settings here will override the ones in `default`. The settings specified in `default` will be used as a base.-->
        </publisher>
    </node>
<qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/**:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: /my_ns/nested_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: /another_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: /another_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
```

## Interaction with remapping and expansion

Topic, services and node names in the parameter file would be interpreted as the already remapped names. e.g.:

```bash

> ros2run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args -r chatter:=my_chatter --qos-file /path/to/qos/file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ros2 run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args -r chatter:=my_chatter --qos-file /path/to/qos/file
```

Author: ups, corrected in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

```

The topic that will be looked up in the qos profile file is `my_chatter`, and not `chatter`.

> Relatives topic/service names will be allowed used under a `node` tag, but it will not be allowed under the `default` tag.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Relative topic/service names will be allowed used under a `node` tag, but it will not be allowed under the `default` tag.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a7e05eb5998ea0978e1cccfb8bd4b93985f457e.

/// Set qos for publisher with profile id
rcl_ret_t
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_set_publisher_qos_with_id(
    rcl_qos_profiles_builder_t * builder,
    const char * node_name,
    const char * node_ns,
    const char * qos_profile_id,
    const rmw_qos_profile_t * qos);

/// Similar methods for subscriptions/clients/services
...

/// Build a `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` object
rcl_ret_t
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_get_loaded_profiles(rcl_qos_profiles_builder_t * builder, rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t * lp);
```

How to parse a `rmw_qos_profile_t` from the qos file is up to the specific loader.

### Usage in init options and node options

A `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` member could be added in both `rcl_init_options_t` and `rcl_node_options_t`.
The one in init options will be common to all nodes in the same contexts, and can be overridden by the one in node options.

Optionally, we could also add in `rcl_node_options_t` a boolean to indicate to use the `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` in init options if the profile was not found in the node specific loaded profiles object.

### New ros argument

A new argument will be needed to allow the user to specify which file to load.

```bash

> ros2run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args --qos-file /path/to/qos/file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ros2 run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args --qos-file /path/to/qos/file
```

Author: done

```

This loading mechanism will be equivalent to setting the `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` member in init options.

## Further extensions

### Loading qos profiles in composable nodes

The interface definition of the [LoadNode](https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/blob/master/composition_interfaces/srv/LoadNode.srv) service could be extended with a field to specify the desired `QoS` of the loaded node.

In that way, the user loading the node is responsible of passing the desired QoS, instead of the node container.
The message to be sent could be loaded from a qos profile file.

#### Proposed interfaces

```
# EndpointQoS.msg

string name  # This can be either a topic or service name
uint8 type  # Endpoint type. An enum that can be a publisher/subscription/topic/service

> QoS qos  # Message that defines the qos

Reviewer 3: Do you think a `QoS` message has use without the name and type for the entity?

If not, maybe it's worth moving the `name` and `type` fields to the `QoS` message, leaving us with a single message definition.

Reviewer 2: It might possibly make it easier to reuse instantiated `QoS` messages?

Author: I image that a `QoS` message can have value on its own.

```

```

> # EndpointQoS.msg

Reviewer 3: Looks like this block is repeated twice and can be removed.

uint8 type  # Endpoint type. An enum that can be a publisher/subscription/topic/service
QoS qos  # Message that defines the qos
```

```
# composition_interfaces/srv/LoadNode.srv

# Current request fields
...
# New field
EndpointQoS[] requested_qos_profiles  # new field to allow loading user requested qos profiles
---
# Current response definition
...
```

A `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` can be constructed from the received message and passed to the node options of the node to be loaded.

TBD: `QoS` message definition.

### Support in launch files

`launch_ros.actions.Node` and `launch_ros.actions.LoadComposableNode` actions could support a qos file argument in their constructors.

## File format

As showed in the above examples, both YAML or XML can correctly represent the desired file format.

XML advantages:
- Can be easily verified.
YAML advantages:
- It can be argued that the format is simpler and more readable than XML.
- The format proposed in the above examples can easily be integrated with the current parameter file format.
  That integration would lead in a unique "configuration file", that could be further extended in the future.

>   For example, passing remapping rules in it.

Reviewer 2: Now we're starting to creep into system definition territory.

It's somewhere I want to go but let's not go there right now. :stuck_out_tongue: Better to stick to separate QoS files for now I think.

Author: > Now we're starting to creep into system definition territory.
> It's somewhere I want to go but let's not go there right now.  Better to stick to separate QoS files for now I think.

Well I think that the proposal is already in the "system definition" territory, besides if we have an unified file or not :joy:.
I think it would be good to consider if this is desired in the future or not, so we can take a better decision now.

Reviewer 2: It's a tough question.

On the one hand, having QoS parameters specified separately from parameters avoids heading in the direction of a monolithic "specify everything" file, which is a slippery slope that leads to decreased flexibility and reusability.

On the other hand, having to go to half a dozen different places to specify your system is the sort of approach that only works well when you have an IDE that makes getting to those places a one-click thing.

I think for now I would err on the side of having a structure that _could_ be merged with the parameter file (i.e. it doesn't conflict in any way) but not try to actually use them together.

Author: > I think for now I would err on the side of having a structure that could be merged with the parameter file (i.e. it doesn't conflict in any way) but not try to actually use them together.

Yeah, that's my idea.
I don't aim to merge both file formats now, it would be a lot of work.

## Explicitly allowing external configurability in entities

> Both node and init options could have a flag to ignore the new `--qos-file` argument.

Reviewer 3: I'm not convinced we want to completely ignore QoS overrides. If a user tries to set the QoS for a node that doesn't accept it, I don't think it should silently fail. They should see at least a warning, or at most an error should occur when starting the node. This avoids a situation where someone thinks that they've changed the QoS when it didn't actually do anything.

I realize this gets a little tricky if we want to allow "default" QoS settings for all nodes (as described earlier in the document). Perhaps in this case, it is okay to silently ignore QoS settings not tied to named node. On the other hand, it could still be misleading and maybe it's still better to warn or error. I'm ambivalent at the moment.

Reviewer 2: I come down on the side of "if the system integrator says it, the node can't ignore it".

Nodes need a way to validate that the provided QoS meets the requirements of the node. e.g. A SLAM node needs to get every laser scan so lossy QoS won't do. But apart from that nodes should either accept the given QoS or they should noisily reject it.

Author: > I'm not convinced we want to completely ignore QoS overrides. If a user tries to set the QoS for a node that doesn't accept it, I don't think it should silently fail. They should see at least a warning, or at most an error should occur when starting the node. This avoids a situation where someone thinks that they've changed the QoS when it didn't actually do anything.

I don't think it should fail, I think it should not try to get the QoS settings from a file.

> They should see at least a warning

The problem with showing a warning, is that you're actually loading and checking the file.

> Nodes need a way to validate that the provided QoS meets the requirements of the node. e.g. A SLAM node needs to get every laser scan so lossy QoS won't do. But apart from that nodes should either accept the given QoS or they should noisily reject it.

I don't see why the node's author should reject a non reliable QoS in this case.
If the person integrating the system wants to try best effort communication, they should be able to do so.

Reviewer 3: > If the person integrating the system wants to try best effort communication, they should be able to do so.

This sounds contrary to the idea that node authors have to opt-in. If an integrator wants to use best effort for a topic, and the author hasn't opted-in to allow this change to be made, then I think the integrator should receive a warning.

> The problem with showing a warning, is that you're actually loading and checking the file.

Maybe it doesn't make sense to have an option to ignore the QoS file. From an integrator's perspective, if I provide a QoS file trying to configure a node, I want to know if that configuration is valid (ie. if the node actually accepted the changes to QoS). So, I think it's necessary for something to parse the file and check with the relevant nodes that everything is okay, warning otherwise.

Reviewer 2: > I don't see why the node's author should reject a non reliable QoS in this case.
If the person integrating the system wants to try best effort communication, they should be able to do so.

I think it's like saying "You can use character buffers without null if you like, but the behaviour is undefined" versus "You can't use unterminated strings". We can give node authors the ability to specify the limits on their node's capabilities and _have the tool chain enforce them_, or we can rely on developers to follow what the documentation says and hope they realise it's their use of the node that's broken, not the node's implementation, when it doesn't work.

This is particularly important for a node author who wants to provide guarantees about behaviour for reasons such as safety.

> Maybe it doesn't make sense to have an option to ignore the QoS file. From an integrator's perspective, if I provide a QoS file trying to configure a node, I want to know if that configuration is valid (ie. if the node actually accepted the changes to QoS). So, I think it's necessary for something to parse the file and check with the relevant nodes that everything is okay, warning otherwise.

I agree with this. I don't like giving nodes the ability to blanket-reject all QoS changes. I'd prefer node authors to have to at least think about it, and if they still blanket-reject all changes they have to write that themselves and we can see it as a bad smell.

Author: We can add a callback to reject the changes if that's what the majority wants.

IMO, it's adding a "false sense" of ensuring that the QoS will be used in the correct way, and we can end up with node's authors restricting QoS settings that actually work unnecessarily (e.g. restricting only to the ones they tested).
The mechanism to ensure that the proposed QoS is valid is IMO extremely verbose too.

With "false sense", I mean that the system integrator can still screw up the QoS between nodes.
They could setup a reliable QoS in a subscription in one node, and configure by mistake the "matching" publisher with best effort reliability, and they system won't work.

For example in this case:
>  A SLAM node needs to get every laser scan so lossy QoS won't do

Should the node author reject all QoS that are non reliable and doesn't have keep all durability?
Because without both, the communication can't be ensured to be truly non-lossy.

> Maybe it doesn't make sense to have an option to ignore the QoS file. From an integrator's perspective, if I provide a QoS file trying to configure a node, I want to know if that configuration is valid (ie. if the node actually accepted the changes to QoS). So, I think it's necessary for something to parse the file and check with the relevant nodes that everything is okay, warning otherwise.

:+1:, always parsing the file sounds reasonable .

> I don't like giving nodes the ability to blanket-reject all QoS changes

I'm sorry, but I don't understand where "blanket-reject all QoS changes" was suggested.
Maybe I miss-explained something.

Reviewer 3: > I'm sorry, but I don't understand where "blanket-reject all QoS changes" was suggested.

Maybe this is in response to my comment about requiring node authors to opt-in to QoS configuration? I do think that the default behavior should be to "blanket-reject" all QoS changes. I.e. If the node author doesn't explicitly configure any node entities to have configurable QoS, then any attempts to override QoS values should fail (IMO, not silently).

Reviewer 2: > With "false sense", I mean that the system integrator can still screw up the QoS between nodes.
They could setup a reliable QoS in a subscription in one node, and configure by mistake the "matching" publisher with best effort reliability, and they system won't work.

This is true, and it hints at the two different levels to what is allowable QoS:

1. Nodes need to define what they can support to ensure their behaviour is as defined by the node author. In general, I think we prefer that node authors go as broad as possible in what QoS they support.
2. System integrators need to define what they want to use. In general, they should go as narrow as possible.

I do agree that there is a risk that a node author will just shut it down to only what they've tested, but I don't see how that is different from a default of "reject all changes". However in either case the most important thing to me is that it fails noisily, not silently.

Author: I've added the concept of QoS acceptance callbacks to the proposal https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7.

> However in either case the most important thing to me is that it fails noisily, not silently.

The idea is that if the loaded QoS profile is rejected, the code will fail immediately.

> In a similar way, there could be an option for publishers/subscriptions/clients and services to allow side loading their qos or not.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? How does it relate to the QoS settings that the node receives?

Author: The node/context will have a structure of the loaded profiles.
When an entity is created and side loading qos is allowed, it will look up the loaded profiles in the node (or the global ones if the ones in the node aren't defined), and load the profile from there. That will only happen if the entity options allow side-loading too.

I will try to make that clearer in the document.

Reviewer 2: The problem (for me) is that I'm still not clear what you mean by "side loading".

Author: With side loading, I mean loading the qos profile from a external file, or by another external way no specified in code (as the `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` object could potentially be constructed in a different way).

I've rephrased in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7, let me know if it's clearer now.

Reviewer 2: Yep, that makes much more sense now. Thanks!

In nodes designed to be reused, it does make sense to allow side-loading the qos settings of all entities.
To make this use case easier, the following options can be added:

- `rcl_init_options_t` is extended with a `bool allow_side_loading_qos`.
- The following enum is defined:
  ```c
  typedef enum rcl_side_load_qos_t {
      RCL_SIDE_LOAD_QOS_DEFAULT;
      RCL_SIDE_LOAD_QOS_ENABLED;
      RCL_SIDE_LOAD_QOS_DISABLED;
  } rcl_side_load_qos_t;
  ```

> - A `rcl_side_load_qos_t allow_side_loading_qos` member is added to `rcl_node_options_t`, it will copy the behavior defined in the `rcl_init_options_t` of its parent context when the enum value is `RCL_SIDE_LOAD_QOS_DEFAULT`.

Reviewer 3: How does this strategy play out when loading composable nodes? For example, if I load a composable node without setting the "side load" policy, is it inheriting the behavior from the context provided by the container?

I don't think we want a loaded component to inherit an ENABLED flag, since we've previously expressed interest in making configurable QoS an opt-in feature. I.e. I think the default should always be "disabled" (regardless of the parent context settings). Then, we don't need an enum and can just use a boolean.

Author: > How does this strategy play out when loading composable nodes? For example, if I load a composable node without setting the "side load" policy, is it inheriting the behavior from the context provided by the container?

Using `allow_side_loading_qos=false` in the container init options solves the problem.
That would actually be the default, and it's not going to be an external mechanism to change it (it can only be changed in code).
The loaded node can tweak its node options to allow side loading or not, the container is not going to be able to make that decision.

> I don't think we want a loaded component to inherit an ENABLED flag, since we've previously expressed interest in making configurable QoS an opt-in feature. I.e. I think the default should always be "disabled" (regardless of the parent context settings). Then, we don't need an enum and can just use a boolean.

I think that deleting the three states enum in node options make sense, but not for subscriptions/publishers/clients services.
The most common use case is to enable the feature in all the sub-entities of a node, thus why I have added this option.

This allows granularity, it's default opt-out, the author of the node has complete control over it, and it can easily be opted-in for the most common use case (enabling the feature in all the sub-entities of a node).
The first three points where the concerns raised, and this mechanism solves them.

Not having a way of enabling easily the feature for all subentities of a node will end up in a flag being passed to 10000000 entities.

Reviewer 3: > The loaded node can tweak its node options to allow side loading or not, the container is not going to be able to make that decision.

Okay, sounds good. I just wanted to make sure that it's not possible, by default, for an integrator to change the QoS of a nodes entities.

> I think that deleting the three states enum in node options make sense, but not for subscriptions/publishers/clients services.
The most common use case is to enable the feature in all the sub-entities of a node, thus why I have added this option.

:+1:

> - In a similar way, publisher/subscription/client/service options will have a `rcl_side_load_qos_t allow_side_loading_qos` that will copy the behavior set in the node in case `RCL_SIDE_LOAD_QOS_DEFAULT` is used.

Reviewer 3: I think for individual entities, we will want to be able to turn on/off the configurability of specific QoS settings. For example, letting users change the history depth, but not the durability of a subscription.

I imagine an easy way to enable this capability is to allow node authors to register a callback (like you mention at the end of this document). The callback gets called when users try to configure a QoS setting (or group of QoS settings); similar to "on set" parameter callbacks, they can return "SUCCESS" or "REJECT" based on whatever logic they like. I guess this has the downside of not being easily implemented at the `rcl` layer. Perhaps a more static description of what QoS settings are allowed to be configured is better for `rcl`. QoS settings have a set well-known options after all.

Author: > I think for individual entities, we will want to be able to turn on/off the configurability of specific QoS settings. For example, letting users change the history depth, but not the durability of a subscription.

I don't see when not allowing to change the durability policy is useful.

Reviewer 3: > I don't see when not allowing to change the durability policy is useful.

We can imagine a scenario where the node author does *not* want a subscription to get messages that were published before it started (e.g. don't allow *transient_local*). If an integrator is allowed to change the durability, they may be violating the node authors assumptions, and inadvertently "break" the node. I think having this fine-grained ability to turn on/off different QoS settings makes it easier for the node author to set expectations about how the node is meant to be used.

One example that comes to mind is the [static TF broadcaster](https://github.com/ros2/geometry2/blob/e813f131e5663133b5db956fae1f413b6290a303/tf2_ros/include/tf2_ros/static_transform_broadcaster_node.hpp) and TF listener, which uses *transient local* for it's durability on the `/tf_static` topic. If we let an integrator change the durability to *volatile*, it would break assumptions for a lot of tooling built around the `/tf_static` topic.

Author: I've added the concept QoS acceptance callbacks to the proposal https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/a0e635f3500e457bf56a36862651fe3bcf50b0a7.

To solve this issue, the format could support using a profile ID, in addition to the topic name:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="my_pub_profile_1">
            ...
        </publisher>
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="my_pub_profile_2">
            ...
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: my_pub_profile_1
            qos:
                ...
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: my_pub_profile_2
            qos:
                ...
```

`rcl` API would need to be extended to support profiles IDs.
Users should only use this mechanism to avoid collisions.

### Default profiles for entities in different nodes

It is common to have several nodes creating the same entity, and the same QoS profile is desired in all of them.
A default tag can be added to solve this:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>
        <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">
            ...
        </publisher>
    </default>

>     <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">

Reviewer 4: Would it be reasonable to support wildcards in the names?

Author: that sounds reasonable to me

Author: See https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/d22a11cdb6d97417631cb4f5aa7de93f1c761396.

- Command line arguments
- ROS parameters
- Combining system default QoS with vendor specific QoS profiles.

Instead of having different ways of externally specifying QoS for the different entities, it would be good to have a standardized way to select QoS settings.

## QoS file format

DDS uses the concept of QoS profiles, in which each profile has a name.
When creating an entity (e.g. a `DataWriter`), the passed profile name will be looked up in the QoS profiles file being used, and the QoS can be loaded in that way rather than from hard-coded values in the source code.

If ROS would have QoS profiles names, like in DDS, collisions between those names in nodes written by different authors could happen.
Thus, QoS profiles names would need the full power of remapping and expansion.

This proposal uses the opposite approach, identifying an entity leveraging node name uniqueness <sup id="back_node_name_uniqueness">[1](#to_node_name_uniqueness)</sup> and through the use of topic/service names.

<b id="to_node_name_uniqueness">1</b> Node name uniqueness is not being enforced up to Foxy, though it is assumed. [↩](#back_node_name_uniqueness)

> 

Reviewer 3: It's probably worth mentioning "why" XML or YAML (or why support both?).

In the "File format" section below, we discuss pros/cons of each, but we don't actually conclude to use one or the other. I think we should make that decision clear and consider moving that section here (the titles make it sound like it should be merged here anyways). If we "decide" on a format earler in the document, then we can reduce the number of examples in this document by only keeping the intended format. I'm not sure there's value in having examples of multiple formats, unless there's intention to support multiple parsers.

My gut reaction is to stick with YAML, since we already use it for parameters in `rcl`.

Author: > My gut reaction is to stick with YAML, since we already use it for parameters in rcl.

That's my reaction too.

> I'm not sure there's value in having examples of multiple formats, unless there's intention to support multiple parsers.

I like proposing more than one format when I'm thinking something, I'm not sure if it adds much value or not.

> there's intention to support multiple parsers

I don't think that supporting multiple parsers is a good idea.

Reviewer 3: I think having multiple examples is fine. I guess what I'm asking for a bit more clarity in the document. Reading through it, it gave me the impression that I should expect to write my QoS files in XML, and with the possible option of writing them in YAML. Also, the use of the work "tag" throughout makes me think of XML (I think "tag" means something different in YAML).

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/cb65f0dbed09297743156f2adf73229e563e9f8c.

QoS settings apply to entities that are associated with ROS nodes.
Thus, a top level tag to identify the node should be available in the file format.
Here are a couple of examples:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        ...
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        ...
```

### Entity type

It should be possible to distinguish between the different entity types in a QoS profile file.
For example:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">  <!--Relative name-->
            ...
        </publisher>
        <subscription topic_name="/another_ns/asd">  <!--Absolute name-->
            ...
        </subscription>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: /another_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
```

Besides `publisher` and `subscription` tags, `client` and `service` should be allowed.

### QoS profiles IDs (optional)

> In the case that a node wants to create two `publishers` on the same topic with different QoS, the above format wouldn't allow to identify uniquely the `publisher`. The same applies to other kinds of entitys.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case that a node wants to create two `publishers` on the same topic with different QoS, the above format wouldn't allow to uniquely identify the `publisher`. The same applies to other kinds of entitys.
```

To solve this issue, the format could support using a profile ID, in addition to the topic name:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="1">
            ...
        </publisher>
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="2">
            ...
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd

>             profile_id: 1

Reviewer 3: In the proposed C API, the profile ID is a string. Consider updating these examples to clarify that they are not necessarily integers.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/9b7db819c466a78df41e1506c271b8e9a69765c4

            qos:
                ...
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: 2
            qos:
                ...
```

`rcl` API would need to be extended to support profiles id.
Users should only use this mechanism to avoid collisions.

### Default profiles for entities in different nodes

> It is common to have several nodes creating the same entity, and the same qos profile is desired in all of them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is common to have several nodes creating the same entity, and the same QoS profile is desired in all of them.
```

                <lifespan>10s</lifespan>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/**:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        profiles:
            reliable_depth_100:
                reliability: reliable
                history_depth: 100
                history: keep_last
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                base: reliable_depth_100
        publisher:
            topic_name: bsd
            qos:
                base: reliable_depth_100
                lifespan: 10s
```

This mechanism will help ensuring matching QoS profile, where that's needed in the system.

Having some implicitly defined named profiles can become handy to easily write profiles.
The following could be implicitly defined:

- ros_default: Equivalent to `rmw_qos_profile_default`.
- ros_sensor_data: Equivalent to `rmw_qos_profile_sensor_data`.
- ros_service_default: Equivalent to `rmw_qos_profile_services_default` (as of ROS 2 Foxy, the same as `ros_default`).
- ros_system_default: Equivalent to `rmw_qos_profile_system_default`.

> See [qos_profiles.h](https://github.com/ros2/rmw/blob/master/rmw/include/rmw/qos_profiles.h).

Reviewer 3: It might be better to use a permalink in case the filename or location changes in the future.

Author: > It might be better to use a permalink in case the filename or location changes in the future.

```suggestion
See [qos_profiles.h](https://github.com/ros2/rmw/blob/0176872b10ff502ae34fa3eef5e900145f18b0b3/rmw/include/rmw/qos_profiles.h).
```

If there was a profile defined in the `<default>` section for the same topic or the same service, that one will be used:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>
        <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">
            <qos>
                <reliability>reliable</reliability>
                <history_depth>100</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </default>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            <history_depth>1000</history_depth>  <!--Overrides the history depth of 100 defined above.-->
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/**:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: /my_ns/nested_ns/asd
            qos:
                reliability: reliable
                history_depth: 100
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                history_depth: 1000
```

If that doesn't happen, `rmw_qos_profile_default` is used as a base.

### Rationale

> There are other options to handle a non fully specified qos profile:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are other options to handle a non fully specified QoS profile:
```

> - Reject those qos profiles, and force users to specify all policies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Reject those QoS profiles, and force users to specify all policies.
```

> - Use the original qos profile specified in code as a base profile.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use the original QoS profile specified in code as a base profile.
```

The first option would be extremely verbose, and it doesn't make much sense to explicitly set some QoS settings like `lifespan` when you don't care about them.

> The last option is possible, but it would be hard to tell what was the original profile, and code would have been to be carefully checked.

Reviewer 3: IMO, we want this option instead; trusting the node author to have chosen reasonable defaults. I think it's different if an integrator specifies a whole profile (e.g. `ros_sensor_data`); in this case we could use what is in the file. But if no profile is explicitly provided, then I don't think defaulting to `rmw_qos_profile_default` makes it any more clear what the QoS settings are. I think it's not intuitive that passing an empty QoS file may result in different settings versus not passing a file at all (ie. if the node author did not use `rmw_qos_profile_default`).

Author: Yeah, I originally was going to propose this alternative, but then I changed my mind.
I think there are two cases:
1. Profiles in the `<default>` or `<profiles>` section.
2. Profiles defined inline in a `<node>` section.

In case 1., using the QoS profile specified by the author as a base doesn't make sense.
Imagine the following case:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>
        <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">
            <qos>
              <history_depth>1000</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </default>
</qos_profiles>
```

Node A has reliable QoS policy set for its /my_ns/nested_ns/asd publisher in code.
Node B has best effor QoS policy set for its /my_ns/nested_ns/asd publisher in code.

Is the profile in code is taken as the default, it will create an unexpected difference between the two profiles.
So maybe for the profiles in the `<default>` section, my suggestion makes sense.

The problem is similar with "named profiles".

Maybe `base=<profile_name>`  should be mandatory in this case, that's not a bad idea.

For case 2., e.g:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name=... namespace=...>
        <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">
            <qos>
              <history_depth>1000</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

your suggestion makes sense to me.

What do you think?

Reviewer 3: Yes, that makes sense to me. Basically, we should update the line above:

```diff
- If that doesn't happen, `rmw_qos_profile_default` is used as a base.
+ If no base profile is specified and no default profile exists for an entity, then the QoS settings set by the node author are used as a base.
```

Author: Solved in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/94c1e103ba494263440b7a7d451762b88b494942.

## Interaction with remapping and expansion

Topic, services and node names in the parameter file would be interpreted as the already remapped names. e.g.:

```bash
ros2 run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args -r chatter:=my_chatter --qos-file /path/to/qos/file
```

> The topic that will be looked up in the qos profile file is `my_chatter`, and not `chatter`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The topic that will be looked up in the QoS profile file is `my_chatter`, and not `chatter`.
```

Relative topic/service names will be allowed used under a `node` tag, but it will not be allowed under the `default` tag.
In that case, they will be extended with the namespace specified in the parent `node` tag.

### Rationale

Parameter files works in the same way.
The usefulness of this kind of files is to allow the user to configure a set of nodes easily for a particular use case.
Applying remapping rules to the names in the file will only add complexity and be more confusing.

## rcl API

> 

Reviewer 3: nit: remove extra blank line

Author: > nit: remove extra blank line

```suggestion
```

The proposed API aims to decouple the object that represents the loaded QoS profile file from the loader.

### rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t

> Structure that represents the loaded qos profiles file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Structure that represents the loaded QoS profiles file.
```

```

There could be different functions for different formats.

### Loaded profiles builder

Infrastructure to easily build a `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` object.
The intent of this API is to decouple and actual parser (e.g. XML), from how a `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` is built.

```c
/// Default initializer
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_t
rcl_get_default_initialized_qos_profiles_builder();

/// Set qos for publisher
rcl_ret_t
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_set_publisher_qos(
    rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_builder_t * builder,
    const char * node_name,
    const char * node_ns,
    const char * topic_name,
    const rmw_qos_profile_t * qos);

/// Set qos for publisher with profile id
rcl_ret_t
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_set_publisher_qos_with_id(
    rcl_qos_profiles_builder_t * builder,
    const char * node_name,
    const char * node_ns,
    const char * qos_profile_id,
    const rmw_qos_profile_t * qos);

/// Similar methods for subscriptions/clients/services
...

/// Build a `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` object
rcl_ret_t
rcl_qos_profiles_builder_get_loaded_profiles(rcl_qos_profiles_builder_t * builder, rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t * lp);
```

> How to parse a `rmw_qos_profile_t` from the qos file is up to the specific loader.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How to parse a `rmw_qos_profile_t` from the QoS file is up to the specific loader.
```

### Usage in init options and node options

A `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` member could be added in both `rcl_init_options_t` and `rcl_node_options_t`.
The one in init options will be common to all nodes in the same contexts, and can be overridden by the one in node options.

Optionally, we could also add in `rcl_node_options_t` a boolean to indicate to use the `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` in init options if the profile was not found in the node specific loaded profiles object.

### New ros argument

A new argument will be needed to allow the user to specify which file to load.

```bash
ros2 run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args --qos-file /path/to/qos/file
```

This loading mechanism will be equivalent to setting the `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` member in init options.

## Further extensions

> ### Loading qos profiles in composable nodes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Loading QoS profiles in composable nodes
```

The interface definition of the [LoadNode](https://github.com/ros2/rcl_interfaces/blob/master/composition_interfaces/srv/LoadNode.srv) service could be extended with a field to specify the desired QoS of the loaded node.

In that way, the user loading the node is responsible of passing the desired QoS, instead of the node container.

> The message to be sent could be loaded from a qos profile file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The message to be sent could be loaded from a QoS profile file.
```

#### Proposed interfaces

```
# EntityQoS.msg

string name  # This can be either a topic or service name

> uint8 type  # Entity type. An enum that can be a publisher/subscription/topic/service

Reviewer 3: Should we add a `profile_id` field too?

Author: See https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/0d1b8e33025d658ae13ea481bd2ae9d7caad7d5f.

QoS qos  # Message that defines the qos
```

```
# composition_interfaces/srv/LoadNode.srv

# Current request fields
...
# New field
EntityQoS[] requested_qos_profiles  # new field to allow loading user requested qos profiles
---
# Current response definition
...
```

A `rcl_qos_loaded_profiles_t` can be constructed from the received message and passed to the node options of the node to be loaded.

TBD: QoS message definition.

### QoS profiles for actions

Currently, there is a collection of [5 QoS profiles](https://github.com/ros2/rcl/blob/af438bcca1ffb69714c0b225ba0f80aceab04906/rcl_action/include/rcl_action/action_client.h#L44-L52) to be set for creating an action, that will set the QoS profiles of the topics and services making up the action.
The file format should support actions, if not the user would have to use the topics and service names with the mangling `rcl` applies, which is a bit hard to remember.

> For the most common use cases, it makes sense to set the 5 QoS profiles to the same settings:

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what this means. Same settings as what? All 5 QoS profiles the same as each other?

I don't think we want them all to be the same. By design, the [status topic defaults to TRANSIENT_LOCAL durability with a history depth of 1](http://design.ros2.org/articles/actions.html#goal-status-topic). I guess it would not be desired if the status topic QoS changed when the user wanted to only change the QoS for the feedback topic or one of the services.

I think because we haven't fully thought about configuring all entities of an actions with a single QoS profile, we don't have to cover how to override their configuration in this document. It's adding to the scope, and it probably deserves a separate design ticket (or amendment to the existing Actions document).

I think it's enough to leave a note that currently there is no way do this high-level QoS configuration of actions., and we only support configuring the individual entities (like the second example below).

Author: >  All 5 QoS profiles the same as each other?

That was my idea, but if the defaults are already different that make things more complicated.
For the moment, I think we can support setting them separately in the file.

We could in the future, define a single QoS profile for the whole entity.
I think that would make the configuration simple (I cannot even think of all the combinations that are possible now).

Author: Done in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/3a06c66c5c5df24a8c13346a3ffc2560fab2f34b.

Reviewer 3: > We could in the future, define a single QoS profile for the whole entity.
I think that would make the configuration simple (I cannot even think of all the combinations that are possible now).

Yeah, there may be a few reasonable QoS profiles we could define for actions that span multiple entities (it deserves some thought), but I think it's out of scope of this document.

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <action_client name="my_action">
            <qos>
                <history_depth>100</history_depth>
            </qos>
        </action_client>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        action:
            name: my_action
            qos:
                history_depth: 100
```

The file format could also support to set each of the QoS profiles individually:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <action_client name="my_action">
            <feedback>
                <qos>
                    <history_depth>100</history_depth>
                </qos>
            <feedback>
        </action_client>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        action_client:
            name: my_action
            feedback:
                qos:
                    history_depth: 100
```

It would be worth revisiting if having 5 different QoS profiles for defining actions make sense before extending the file format in such a way.

### Support in launch files

> `launch_ros.actions.Node` and `launch_ros.actions.LoadComposableNode` actions could support a qos file argument in their constructors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`launch_ros.actions.Node` and `launch_ros.actions.LoadComposableNode` actions could support a QoS file argument in their constructors.
```

### rmw implementation specific payload

There are currently QoS settings that are supported by DDS and not by ROS.
An user might want to make use of them, and they won't find an easy way to do that without exposing the QoS setting on ROS.

> There are some cases where an user might want to use a vendor specific QoS extension, for example rti allows defining [flow controllers](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-dds/5.2.0/doc/manuals/connext_dds/html_files/RTI_ConnextDDS_CoreLibraries_UsersManual/Content/UsersManual/CreatingandConfigCustomFlowC.htm) in publishers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are some cases where an user might want to use a vendor specific QoS extension, for example RTI allows defining [flow controllers](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-dds/5.2.0/doc/manuals/connext_dds/html_files/RTI_ConnextDDS_CoreLibraries_UsersManual/Content/UsersManual/CreatingandConfigCustomFlowC.htm) in publishers.
```

> Though a DDS vendor specific QoS profile file can be used to set up these QoS settings, you currently can only use the default qos profile.

Reviewer 3: I don't quite understand this point. I think you are you saying that we can only specify the default QoS for the rmw vendor, and not customize the settings per node entity. Is that right?

Author: > I don't quite understand this point. I think you are you saying that we can only specify the default QoS for the rmw vendor, and not customize the settings per node entity. Is that right?

You can only set a profile called "default", that's it.
Every entity will use that profile (publishers, subscriptions, etc).

Because of how the rmw implementation is coded, the policies we're already using won't be read from that profile, except `RMW_QOS_POLICY_*_SYSTEM_DEFAULT` was used. For the policies we're not using (e.g. flow controllers), those would be applied to all entities.

Author: Rephrased in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/75df29cf26d057598c0c76bd14b77c64c6317b74.

> There's no way to match ROS entities to the DDS QoS profile names.

Reviewer 3: To clarify, are these profile names provided by the vendor or the user or both? I guess it depends on the vendor.

Author: You define your profile names in the DDS QoS profile file.
There are also built-in profile names, which depend on the vendor.

Author: Clarified in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/75df29cf26d057598c0c76bd14b77c64c6317b74.

> This problem can be solved in two ways:

Reviewer 3: Seems like we discuss the second point in detail, and don't come to any conclusion on picking a solution. Is the intention to defer picking a solution or actually select one? In either case, I think we should clearly state the conclusion at the end of the section with reasons why.

Author: I tried to not pick solutions through the document, though I can add my suggestions.

Author: Added a comment in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/cfc3da19b8e2f4f4331950ad26e0849fc1b56d7d.

- Having conventions to match DDS QoS profiles names to ROS entities.
  This has been proposed in https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps/pull/335, and could work well for most use cases.
- Adding a rmw implementation specific "payload" that it's then used by the rmw implementation.
  In DDS based implementations, this payload can be just the profile name.

As an example of the second alternative:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">
            <qos>
                <rmw_payload>
                    <profile_name>my_qos_profile_name</profile_name>
                </rmw_payload>
            </qos>
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            rmw_payload:

>                 profile_name: my_qos_profile_name

Reviewer 3: IIUC, there could be arbitrary key-value pairs listed under `rmw_payload`?

Author: yeah ...
```yaml
            rmw_payload:
                custom_qos_1: value_1
                custom_qos_2: value_2
```

The rmw implementation should then parse the key value pairs (which both would be limited to strings).

Author: The single `profile_name` key is a simple example of how we could make use of this.
Anyway, I don't think that implementing this extension should be a priority, but I included the idea for completeness.

```

For this to work, `rmw_qos_profile_t` will need to be extended with a `rmw_qos_profile_payload_t` member defined like:

```c
typedef struct rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t {
  char * key;
  char * value;
} rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t;

> typedef struct rmw_qos_profile_payload_t {

Reviewer 3: It's an implementation detail, but it probably makes sense to use a [rcutils string map](https://github.com/ros2/rcutils/blob/master/include/rcutils/types/string_map.h) for this.

Author: Yeah, I preferred to be explicit here, so the concept is clear.
The actual implementation doesn't matter much.

  rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t * key_value_pairs;
} rmw_qos_profile_payload_t;
```

It would be up to the implementation what to do with the passed key value pairs.

Note:

>   The proposed API is limited, if we would want for example to define vendor specific QoS inline in the ROS QoS profile file.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand what the limitation is. Based on the examples above, it looks like we *are* defining vendor-specific QoS alongside ROS entities in the QoS file.

Author: The limitation is subtle.

If the QoS policy can be represented by an integer or a float (e.g. history_depth is an integer), if we limit values to be a string. They won't be represented in the most natural way possible (specially, if the chosen format is YAML).
Support for a `variant` in C is painful, though possible.

Reviewer 3: Makes sense. I guess it's first sentence that is confusing me. Can we simplify these two sentences to one? e.g.

> The proposed API is limited in that it treats all value as strings instead of taking advantage of natural representations supported by some markup languages.

Author: Done in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/c7ff192d83eea4e9c096389103a0bee4e27bb209.

>   If YAML format is used, we could take advantage of it's natural representation of integers,floats,etc, instead of forcing everything to be an string.

Reviewer 3: This point about YAML seems more generally related to selecting a format for the QoS file, not about rmw-specific payloads.

Author: Marking as resolved to merge the discussion with https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296#discussion_r466683140.

  The complexity of this approach doesn't seem to be worth it.
Note 2:
  The rmw specific payload could simply be an string, instead of key value pairs.

>   In that case, the `profile_name` sub-tag would be deleted and `my_qos_profile_name` would be the content of the string.

Reviewer 3: This note could also be clarified. I guess you are talking about the C data structure, since the QoS file formats are naturally forming key-value pairs.

Author: I'm suggesting the following:

```yaml
rmw_payload: content here
```

The key value pairs representation is more natural, yes.
The above one is just a simpler, and more limited.

Reviewer 3: And then we'd be passing a single string to the rmw to parse, right? I don't know that it makes the implementation simpler. Maybe we don't have to mention this option at all; up to you.

Author: Deleted the note in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/c7ff192d83eea4e9c096389103a0bee4e27bb209.

## File format

As showed in the above examples, both YAML or XML can correctly represent the desired file format.

XML advantages:
- Can be easily verified.

> YAML advantages:

Reviewer 5: Minor formatting issue. Need another newline before "YAML advantages".

Author: Ups, solved in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/bc3582213143ce83e8d30b515a9e799aa2a9cdc9. Thanks!

YAML advantages:
- It can be argued that the format is simpler and more readable than XML.
- The format proposed in the above examples can easily be integrated with the current parameter file format.
  That integration would lead in a unique "configuration file", that could be further extended in the future.
  For example, passing remapping rules in it.

## Explicitly allowing external configurability in entities

The node options could have a flag to ignore the new `--qos-file` argument.

> In a similar way, there could be an option for publishers/subscriptions/clients and services to allow loading the QoS from an external source (side load).

Reviewer 3: I think these two sentences could be refactored, and we could be more explicit about the rationale for this section. E.g.

> Nodes should have an option to enable having their QoS settings configured externally.
> This gives authors the ability to define the allowable range of behavior for their nodes.
> Furthermore, the option to externally configure QoS settings should be disabled by default (ie. node authors must opt-in).
> The rationale for an opt-in policy is to force node authors to have to think about the implications of allowing various QoS changes to the node entities.

Author: See https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/77cd373b8dc049b63e54e8e926723aef1774d5e4.

> In nodes designed to be reused, it does make sense to allow side-loading the qos settings of all entities.

Reviewer 3: This sounds a bit like a "loaded" sentence. I would argue that most nodes are designed to be reused, but this does not imply that all entities should allow their QoS to be configurable (e.g. going back to my static TF broadcaster example). I would rephrase this to something like

> There are many cases where it makes sense to allow external configuration of QoS settings for all entities.

Author: I'm referring to the entities that the node's author created explicitly.
For the ones that are created behind the scenes by other classes, we should add in them a callback or opt-out the feature.

Author: Rephrased in https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/08294d9413d19d64d0c77cecc3f22a7937e7fc57.

To make this use case easier, the following options can be added:

> - `rcl_node_options_t` is extended with a `bool allow_side_loading_qos`.

Reviewer 3: nit: It's a bike-shed comment, but "override" seems more intuitive to me than "side load". This is also similar to the existing terminology for parameters.

Author: Done https://github.com/ros2/design/pull/296/commits/24f9baf1f8d0a4ed29da841b93bee86dc9c193d8.

## Which QoS policies can be externally modified?

It might not make sense to be able to externally modify some of the QoS policies.
For example, modifying `rmw_qos_liveliness_policy_t` externally to `MANUAL_BY_TOPIC`.

### Analysis for each policy

#### History kind, history depth, durability, reliability, lifespan

These four policies provide an abstraction in a way that the code to publish or take a message from a publisher/subscription doesn't have to be changed if the history kind or history depth changed.
Thus, it does not make sense to restrict the external configurability of them.

#### Deadline

If the node is not listening to "deadline missed" events for that entity, modifying it externally won't have any effect.
For nodes that are using this feature, allowing to externally configure it makes sense.

#### Liveliness and liveliness_lease_duration

Different values of `liveliness_lease_duration` always make sense, regardless of how the node is implemented.

> In the case of the liveliness kind, `MANUAL_BY_TOPIC` policy does not make sense if the author of the node doesn't thought about it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of the liveliness kind, `MANUAL_BY_TOPIC`, it does not make sense if the node author hasn't considered it.
```

I'm a bit confused by this section. Are we saying that we will never allow externally setting a value of `MANUAL_BY_TOPIC`?

Author: > I'm a bit confused by this section. Are we saying that we will never allow externally setting a value of MANUAL_BY_TOPIC?

I'm saying that it almost never makes sense, except the author considered both cases which is strange.
That's why I proposed that the default QoS validation callback allows changing everything except the liveliness QoS policy.

To solve this issue, the format could support using a profile ID, in addition to the topic name:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="my_pub_profile_1">
            ...
        </publisher>
        <publisher topic_name="asd" profile_id="my_pub_profile_2">
            ...
        </publisher>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: my_pub_profile_1
            qos:
                ...
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            profile_id: my_pub_profile_2
            qos:
                ...
```

`rcl` API would need to be extended to support profiles IDs.
Users should only use this mechanism to avoid collisions.

### Default profiles for entities in different nodes

It is common to have several nodes creating the same entity, and the same QoS profile is desired in all of them.
A default tag can be added to solve this:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <default>

>         <publisher topic_name="/my_ns/nested_ns/asd">

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to have a default profile that applies to everything, no matter what topic or service?

Author: I imagine:

```xml
<publisher topic_name="/**">
```

I didn't think about something that works for different kind of entities.

                reliability: reliable
                history_depth: 100
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                history_depth: 1000
```

If no base profile is specified and no default profile exists for an entity, then the QoS settings set by the node's author are used as a base.
For topics in the `default` section or for named QoS profiles, `rmw_qos_profile_default` is used as the implicit base.

Note: We could make the `base` attribute mandatory for profiles in the `default` or `profiles` section.

## Interaction with remapping and expansion

Topic, services and node names in the parameter file would be interpreted as the already remapped names. e.g.:

```bash
ros2 run <package_name> <exec_name> --ros-args -r chatter:=my_chatter --qos-file /path/to/qos/file
```

The topic that will be looked up in the QoS profile file is `my_chatter`, and not `chatter`.
Relative topic/service names will be allowed used under a `node` tag, but it will not be allowed under the `default` tag.
In that case, they will be extended with the namespace specified in the parent `node` tag.

### Rationale

> Parameter files works in the same way.
> The usefulness of this kind of files is to allow the user to configure a set of nodes easily for a particular use case.
> Applying remapping rules to the names in the file will only add complexity and be more confusing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Parameter files works in the same way.
- The usefulness of this kind of files is to allow the user to configure a set of nodes easily for a particular use case.
- Applying remapping rules to the names in the file will only add complexity and be more confusing.
```

```

For this to work, `rmw_qos_profile_t` will need to be extended with a `rmw_qos_profile_payload_t` member defined like:

```c
typedef struct rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t {
  char * key;
  char * value;
} rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t;

typedef struct rmw_qos_profile_payload_t {
  rmw_qos_profile_payload_item_t * key_value_pairs;
} rmw_qos_profile_payload_t;
```

It would be up to the implementation what to do with the passed key value pairs.

Note:
  The proposed API is limited in that it treats all value as strings instead of taking advantage of natural representations supported by some markup languages.

## File format

As showed in the above examples, both YAML or XML can correctly represent the desired file format.

XML advantages:
- Can be easily verified.

YAML advantages:
- It can be argued that the format is simpler and more readable than XML.
- The format proposed in the above examples can easily be integrated with the current parameter file format.
  That integration would lead in a unique "configuration file", that could be further extended in the future.
  For example, passing remapping rules in it.

### Author's opinion

> Using yaml sounds preferred.

Reviewer 6: (just a comment) So do I, I don't see we necessarily use XML at the moment.

libyaml is already a dependency of `rcl`, and the proposed format can be easily merged with the existing parameter file format if that's desired in the future.

Though through the document examples were showed both in XML and YAML, supporting both doesn't sound like a good idea.

## Explicitly allowing external configurability in entities

Nodes should have an option to enable having their QoS settings configured externally.
This gives authors the ability to define the allowable range of behavior for their nodes.
Furthermore, the option to externally configure QoS settings should be disabled by default (ie. node authors must opt-in).

> The rationale for an opt-in policy is to force node authors to have to think about the implications of allowing various QoS changes to the node entities.

Reviewer 6: I was thinking opposite. It would be hard for node authors to make decision since this is dependent on what application requires. (i think that i am gonna find difficulty to make decision so maybe i am gonna just enables it.) even with the same `node`, `topics` and `services`, we'd like to adjust the QoS based on the use cases.

Reviewer 7: I would vote for node author opt-in. Otherwise you can end up in out of spec situations with strange behavior that is maybe not obvious when debugging

    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        ...
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        ...
```

### Entity type

It should be possible to distinguish between the different entity types in a QoS profile file.
For example:

```xml
<qos_profiles>
    <node name="my_node" namespace="/my_ns/nested_ns">
        <publisher topic_name="asd">  <!--Relative name-->
            ...
        </publisher>
        <subscription topic_name="/another_ns/asd">  <!--Absolute name-->
            ...
        </subscription>
    </node>
</qos_profiles>
```

```yaml
/my_ns/nested_ns/my_node:
    ros__qos_profiles:
        publisher:
            topic_name: asd
            qos:
                ...
        subscription:
            topic_name: /another_ns/asd
            qos:
                ...
```

Besides `publisher` and `subscription` tags, `client` and `service` should be allowed.

### QoS profiles IDs (optional)

In the case that a node wants to create two `publishers` on the same topic with different QoS, the above format wouldn't allow to uniquely identify the `publisher`. The same applies to other kinds of entitys.

> 

Reviewer 7: So the profile ID provides the matching between entities in the code and in the QoS configuration. I'm wondering if maybe there will be other configurations for entities in future and if it would make sense to have a more generic entity ID.

Author: > So the profile ID provides the matching between entities in the code and in the QoS configuration. I'm wondering if maybe there will be other configurations for entities in future and if it would make sense to have a more generic entity ID.

The concept of ID would apply to subscription/publishers/etc, I'm not sure if I understand the question.

Reviewer 7: > 
> > So the profile ID provides the matching between entities in the code and in the QoS configuration. I'm wondering if maybe there will be other configurations for entities in future and if it would make sense to have a more generic entity ID.
> 
> The concept of ID would apply to subscription/publishers/etc, I'm not sure if I understand the question.

I more thought of other non-QoS topics. Maybe there will be things in future where you have to configure something per entity and a differentiation is needed. 
One example that just comes in my mind would be priorities for callbacks of subscribers. Imagine there is an executor that supports this and can also be configured similar to your QoS settings. Then you could also have two different subscribers on the same topic that shall be handled differently and must be uniquely identified (Maybe a crazy example). 
My point is, if you have to introduce an ID to solve this uniqueness issue for QoS, would it maybe make sense to introduce this more generally? Then it could be reused if other use cases come up where this is needed

Author: Ah, I see your point now.
I think it could be available for other things, there's nothing restricting that.
I wouldn't make that "id" introspectable in the graph though.
